KEP-5027 + 5055: DRA: admin-controlled device attributes + taints (#5034)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-node/5055-device-taints-and-tolerations/README.md

useful for a wide audience.

A good summary is probably at least a paragraph in length.

Both in this section and below, follow the guidelines of the [documentation
style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

With Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA), DRA drivers publish information about
the devices that they manage in ResourceSlices. This information is used by the
scheduler when selecting devices for user requests in ResourceClaims.

With this KEP, DRA drivers can mark devices as tainted such that they won't be
used for scheduling new pods. In addition, pods already running with access to
a tainted device can be stopped automatically. Cluster administrators can do
the same by creating a
[ResourceSliceOverride](../5027-dra-admin-controlled-device-attributes] with a
taint.

Users can decide to ignore specific taints by adding tolerations to their
ResourceClaim.

## Motivation

### Goals

> - Enable taking devices offline for maintenance while still allowing tests pods
>   to request and use those devices.
> 
> - Enable users to decide whether they want to keep running a workload in a degraded
>   mode while a device is unhealthy or prefer to get pods rescheduled.

Reviewer: Running specific workloads on specific devices with taints & tolarations, is probably obvious enough goal that it does not need to be stated here.   But maybe few extra details will raise additional thoughts of the possibilities:
```suggestion
- Enable taking devices offline for maintenance while still allowing tests pods
  to request and use those devices.  Being able to do this device at a time, minizes
  service level disruption.

- Enable users to decide whether they want to keep running separate workloads, or
 a subset of existing workloads, in a degraded  mode while a device is unhealthy, or
 prefer to get pods rescheduled.
```

Author: I updated the first point. But the changes to the second one seem unnecessarily complex, so I kept it as-is.

### Non-Goals

## Proposal

#### Degraded Devices

As driver itself can detect problems which may or not be tolerable for

> workloads, like degraded performance due to overheating. Removing such devices

Author: I meant "A driver itself can..." - fixed.

from the ResourceSlice would unconditionally prevent using them for new
pods. Instead, publishing with a taint informs users about this degradation and
leaves them the choice whether the device is still usable enough to run pods.
It also automates stopping pods which don't tolerate such a degradation.

#### External Health Monitoring

As cluster admin, I am deploying a vendor-provided DRA driver together with a
separate monitoring component for hardware aspects that are not available or
not supported by that DRA driver. When that component detects problems, it can
check its policy configuration and decide to take devices offline by creating

> a ResourceSliceOverride with a taint for affected devices.

Reviewer 2: Probably, we could add maintenance use-case??

Author: This is covered by the first goal. I'm not sure whether it's worth having a separate user story about it.

Reviewer 2: Oh, sorry. I found it 🙇

    // feature gate.
    //
    // +optional
    // +listType=atomic
    // +featureGate=DRADeviceTaints
    Taints []Taint
}

// The device this Taint is attached to has the "effect" on
// any claim and, through the claim, to pods that do not tolerate
// the Taint.
type Taint struct {
    // The taint key to be applied to a device.
    // Must be a label name.
    //
    // +required
    Key string

    // The taint value corresponding to the taint key.
    // Must be a label value.
    //
    // +optional
    Value string

    // The effect of the taint on claims and pods that do not tolerate the taint.
    // Valid effects are NoSchedule and NoExecute. PreferNoSchedule as used for
    // nodes is not valid here.
    //
    // +required
    Effect TaintEffect

    // ^^^^
    //
    // Implementing PreferNoSchedule would depend on a scoring solution for DRA.
    // It might get added as part of that.

    // TimeAdded represents the time at which the taint was added.
    // It is only written for NoExecute taints.
    //
    // +optional
    TimeAdded *metav1.Time
}
```

Taint has the exact same fields as a v1.Taint, but the description is a bit

> different. In particular, PreferNoSchedule is not valid.

Reviewer 2: Are there any strong reason for "PreferNoSchedule" is not valid"?? I supposed we can support this _after_ we supported device scoring(https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/4970). If the reason was device scoring is not released yet, could we support this in the future?

Author: The API must only allow what is actually supported. If PreferNoSchedule is not implemented, then it should get rejected.

Yes, this support can be added later, at which point we need to relax the validation and allow that value.

[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

<!--
This section is incredibly important for producing high-quality, user-focused
documentation such as release notes or a development roadmap. It should be
possible to collect this information before implementation begins, in order to
avoid requiring implementors to split their attention between writing release
notes and implementing the feature itself. KEP editors and SIG Docs
should help to ensure that the tone and content of the `Summary` section is
useful for a wide audience.

A good summary is probably at least a paragraph in length.

Both in this section and below, follow the guidelines of the [documentation
style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

With Dynamic Resource Allocation (DRA), DRA drivers publish information about
the devices that they manage in ResourceSlices. This information is used by the
scheduler when selecting devices for user requests in ResourceClaims.

> With this KEP, DRA drivers can mark devices as tainted such that they won't be

Reviewer 3: Should a device be provisioned before applying the taint? Will this support tainting partitionable devices?

Author: It's possible to set taints for devices that aren't in any ResourceSlice yet ("not provisioned").

Partitionable devices are still devices with names and attributes, so those also can be tainted. Extending the logic so that tainting a source device prevents allocating a not-tainted leaf device (is that the right term?) would be something that has to be implemented separately.

cc @mortent

Reviewer 3: Do you know if the admin must keep device taints in sync with node taints? Is it an admin taint policy issue where the node taints are restrictive, but devices don't have any taints?

Author: Those two kind of taints are completely independent.

An admin can use node taints to affect all pods on a node, or device taints to only affect pods using devices. If both are set, both must be tolerated in the pod resp. claim for a pod to get scheduled or keep running.

Reviewer 3: May be we can add the above discussion in KEP

Reviewer 2: > Those two kind of taints are completely independent.

Yes, that's the point of KEP-5055. This KEP enables cluster admin taint per device (exclude (probably) failure device from scheduling/executing). This feature can improve device utlization of the cluster. Currently, 1 of 8 GPUs has failure and device plugin does not detected, cluster admin taint a whole node even though 7 GPUs are healthy. But, with this KEP, cluster admin can taint the exact failure GPU. 

> May be we can add the above discussion in KEP

I think it's reasonable. Currently, _Taint_ might be used as _Node Taint_ because no othor taints exist in Kubernetes.

Author: I added one paragraph under "Design Details".

used for scheduling new pods. In addition, pods already running with access to
a tainted device can be stopped automatically. Cluster administrators can do
the same by creating a
[ResourceSliceOverride](../5027-dra-admin-controlled-device-attributes] with a
taint.

Users can decide to ignore specific taints by adding tolerations to their
ResourceClaim.

## Motivation

### Goals

- Enable taking devices offline for maintenance while still allowing tests pods
  to request and use those devices. Being able to do this one device at a time
  minimizes service level disruption.

- Enable users to decide whether they want to keep running a workload in a degraded
  mode while a device is unhealthy or prefer to get pods rescheduled.

### Non-Goals

- Not part of the plan for alpha: developing a kubectl command for tainting devices.

>   This may be reconsidered.

Reviewer: Sounds good, thanks!   Please set my earlier review comments as resolved (as I cannot do that).

separate monitoring component for hardware aspects that are not available or
not supported by that DRA driver. When that component detects problems, it can
check its policy configuration and decide to take devices offline by creating
a ResourceSliceOverride with a taint for affected devices.

### Risks and Mitigations

A device can be identified by its names (`<driver name>/<pool name>/<device
name>`) and/or by its attributes (for example, a unique ID). It was a conscious
decision for core DRA to not require that the name is tied to one particular
hardware instance to support hot-swapping. Admins might favor using the names
whereas health monitoring might prefer to be specific and use a vendor-defined
unique ID. Both is supported, which creates additional complexity.

Without a kubectl extension similar to `kubectl taint nodes` the user
experience for admins will be a bit challenging. They need to decide how to
identify the device (by name or with a CEL expression), manually create a
ResourceSliceOverride with a unique name, then remember to remove that
ResourceSliceOverride again. For beta, support in `kubectl` for common

> operations may be needed.

Author: These two paragraphs are also new and discuss the usability aspect. While spelling it out, I noticed that selecting a device by name was in fact not specified yet, so I added it to `ResourceSliceOverride` - see class/driver/pool/device fields there.
